---
layout: page
title: "about"
date: 2015-07-04 18:46
comments: false
sharing: false
footer: true
---

This is the blog of Harold Gim√©nez. I am a software engineer and homebrewer.

I was born and raised in Venezuela drinking mass produced lagers, whisky and
rum. I then tried some craft beers and was intrigued to say the least, although
didn't pursue brewing just yet as I didn't really have the space.

The first craft beers I ever tried were Harpoon IPA and Sam Adams Boston Lager.
I liked them. A lot. I lived in Boston and that's what folks would drink over
there. Well, and Guiness Drought of course.

I then moved to the west coast and tried more delicious IPAs among many many
beers I can't even remember right now, but this is where my love of beer really
started.

My wife got me a homebrewing course at my local home brew shop. I believed we
brewed an amber ale. It hadn't finished fermented when I was brewing solo at
home. My first brewing gear consisted of a turkey frier and the usual bottling
equipment. I was in, and extract brewing would accompany me for many brews to
come.

Like many homebrewers, my collection of brewing equipment kept growing over
time, and soon jumped into all grain and into recipe design. The rest is
history.

I enjoy brewing a bit of everything. I really enjoy hops, in case that's not
clear. I like using some american hops in saisons, or making IPAs with hops
from the southern hemisphere only. I've gone through many a dark ale as well,
brewing imperial stouts, dry irish stouts or porters, and smoking my own malts,
or using rye, oak, fruits and other adjuncts. Everything is valid, and I avoid
forming an opinion on something until I try it.

In this blog I wish to share the stuff that I learn, or the stuff that have
helped me get better at understanding the process of brewing to make better
beer. I also intend to post notes on every brew day going forward, hopefully
you get something out of that.

I would very much like for you to be in touch. Follow me on twitter at
[@flyinghop](https://twitter.com/flyinghop), or check out my instagram feed at
[@flyinghopmachine](https://instagram.com/flyinghopmachine). I'm also on
untapped under @hgmnz. I encourage you to chat with me on these networks, and
to leave your feedback on my posts on this blog as well as sharing it if it's
useful to you.

Finally, if you are interested in a home brew swap, I'm up for it! Just get in
touch.
